•	HOME


Welcome

One of San Francisco’s three original parks, Washington Square was set aside as a public square in 1847 and has been the centerpiece of North Beach for more 



Who We Are 

 The Friends of Washington Square is a group of neighbors and friends dedicated to addressing ongoing needs; interfacing with community leaders, the San Francisco Recreation and Parks 


	•	WHAT'S UP IN THE SQUARE

Enjoy the newly renovated Square!

WE ARE ALL THANKFUL THAT THE RENOVATED SQUARE WAS REOPENED JUST BEFORE COVID RESTRICTIONS WERE INSTITUTED. CONTINUE TO TAKE CARE AND TO ENJOY THE SQUARE. 

Are you interested in learning more about the Trees in the Park? 
Click here for the HortoScience Tree Management Plan
Click here for the Tree Assessment Map

Click here on the Tree Risk Ranking 
​Washington Square Perimeter Landscape Guidelines

Click here to learn more.  ​​


Work Parties for all Parks are on hold pending further notice


	•	HISTORY

History of the Square 

The Park...The Square...Il Giardino. 

The Italians called it the The Garden.  Washington Square is many things.  To some, it is the village green. To some, it’s the front lawn of the Church of Saints Peter and Paul.  To others, it is a sanctuary.  Step out of the Post Office on Stockton Street, and look up.  A massive tower of a tree rivals the spires of the church, in mass and height and nearness to heaven.  Consider the ten giant pines on the corner of Filbert Street and Columbus Avenue. Their soft and vaulted canopy is a chapel, protecting the little playground. 

Mary Nelson

The Semaphore, Telegraph Hill Dwellers

Spring 2000




Juana Briones,  Jasper O'Farrell and the Hippies


Washington Square Park, now the heart of North Beach, has been many things over the years.  Juana Briones grew potatoes and raised cattle here before Jasper O’Farrell laid out San Francisco’s street grid in 1847 and designated this block a city square. Later, neglected by the city, it was used as an unofficial dump bordering a cemetery. Improvements came slowly, but by the 1860s it was used for Fourth of July celebrations, 
and later the square hosted Columbus.

Day celebrations and Italian festivals. When the earthquake and fire struck in 1906, the square sheltered some 600 refugees in tents and wooden shacks.

Originally, the park was a rectangle, but the construction of Columbus Avenue in the 1870s sliced off the corner that is now Marini Plaza, named after a prominent and civic-minded citizen of North Beach.

In the 1950s, a coalition of community groups, the Committee to Beautify Washington Square, spearheaded the effort to redesign the square, eliminating the paths that criss-crossed the park. Lawrence Halprin and Douglas Baylis put Lombardy poplars in the center of a grassy expanse encircled by paths lined with benches, the configuration we have today.

In 1958, the city tried to solve the parking problem by putting a parking garage under the square, a plan that was defeated then but resurfaced periodically until the park was granted landmark status in 2000.

Today, Washington Square is the heart of North Beach, as it has been for many years.  Italian and Chinese residents mix with tourists and techies, aging Beats and hippies. It's truly our town square. 



	•	CALENDAR & CONTACTS

 Advisory Board / Open Meeting​

Since the completion of total renovation of the square in early 2020, the advisory board / open public meetings are being scheduled quarterly. Meeting dates and times are announced by email. If you are not already receiving emails you may provide your contact information  here . Work days, when scheduled, will be announced by email as well. Thank you for your interest and support.​​



Contacts

San Francisco Recreation and Park Department
www.sfrecpark.org

San Francisco Parks Alliance
​www.sfparksalliance.org

San Francisco Park Rangers
www.sfparc.org

San Francisco History
www.foundsf.org

Telegraph Hill Dwellers
www.thd.org

Russian Hill Neighbors
www.rhn.org

​North Beach Neighbors
​www.northbeachneighbors.org



	•	GET INVOLVED


Get Involved!

Name:
Email:
Subject:
Message:

Send



Donate! 

You can contribute to our fund for improvement to the

Park through Parks Alliance, a 501c3 organization. 

Donate on line here.  

Or send your check made out to Parks Alliance, with “Washington Square” 

on the notation line, and mail to 

Friends of Washington Square

 P.O. Box 330171

San Francisco CA 94133



